Add documantation how to add support for a new language (#746)
codenvy/che-docs: src/main/pages/che-7/hands-on-guidance/proc_adding-support-for-a-new-language.adoc

[id="adding-support-for-a-new-language_{context}"]
= Adding support for a new language

This section describes how to add support for a new language into Eclipse Che. 

> While you can directly hook up a Theia plugin or VS Code extension to the plugin API, the usual way is to write a VS Code extension that uses the languageserver-node library to connect a language server to the VS Code extension API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The described method is to writer a VS Code extension that uses the _languageserver-node_ library to connect a language server to the VS Code extension API. Note that it is also possible to directly connect a Che-Theia plug-in or a VS Code extension to the plug-in API.
```

> [discrete]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> == Prerequisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Prerequisites
```

> * Install the latest Che-Theia plug-in Yeoman generator. To do that you need to follow the documentation about link:extending-che.html#bootstrapping-che-theia-plug-in-development-with-yeoman_developing-che-theia-plug-ins[how to develop Che-Theia plug-in with Yeoman.]

Reviewer 2: Why going through using a theia plugin where few lines bellow we say that the prefered way is with a VSCode ext ?

Reviewer 3: Because writing VS Code extensions is well documented, we don't need to repeat this here.

> * Install the latest Che-Theia plug-in Yeoman generator. To do that you need to follow the documentation about link:extending-che.html#bootstrapping-che-theia-plug-in-development-with-yeoman_developing-che-theia-plug-ins[how to develop Che-Theia plug-in with Yeoman.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Install the latest Che-Theia plug-in Yeoman generator. Follow the documentation about link:developing-che-theia-plug-ins.html#bootstrapping-che-theia-plug-in-development-with-yeoman_developing-che-theia-plug-ins[how to develop Che-Theia plug-in with Yeoman.]
```

> [discrete]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> == Procedure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Procedure
```

> . Generate a sample by running `yo @theia/plugin`. When prompted, confirm the choices for *Backend plug-in*, *Samples*, and then *Language sample*. This creates a project and a ready-to-use plug-in, which provides support for XML Language Server and can be deployed.

Reviewer 2: Could we provide a devfile for that ?

> . Generate a sample by running `yo @theia/plugin`. When prompted, confirm the choices for *Backend plug-in*, *Samples*, and then *Language sample*. This creates a project and a ready-to-use plug-in, which provides support for XML Language Server and can be deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Generate a sample by running the `yo @theia/plugin` command. When prompted, confirm the choices for *Backend plug-in*, *Samples*, and then *Language sample*. This creates a project and a ready-to-use plug-in, which provides support for XML Language Server and can be deployed.
```

> . Replace the download url of the implementation of language server protocol in `src/download-xml-ls.js` file. This file will be downloaded during the build process of the plug-in. If the name of `src/download-xml-ls.js` was changed, you need to replace it in `package.json` in `scripts` block as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Replace the download URL of the implementation of the language server protocol in the `src/download-xml-ls.js` file. This file will be downloaded during the build process of the plug-in. If the name of `src/download-xml-ls.js` changed, replace it in the `package.json` file in the `scripts` block.
```

> . Replace the configuration of the language in `src/language-configuration.json` file, this file should contain configuration options for current language. If the name of `src/language-configuration.json` was changed, you need to replace it in `package.json` in `contribution` block as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Replace the configuration of the language in the `src/language-configuration.json` file. This file contains configuration options for the current language. If the name of `src/language-configuration.json` changed, replace it in the `package.json` file in the `contribution` block.
```

> . Replace the configuration of the language in `src/xml.tmLanguage.json` file, this file describes syntax highlighting, determines the color and style of source code displayed in the editor. If the name of `src/xml.tmLanguage.json` was changed, you need to replace it in `package.json` in `contribution.grammars` block as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Replace the configuration of the language in the `src/xml.tmLanguage.json` file. This file describes syntax highlighting. If the name of `src/xml.tmLanguage.json` changed, replace it in the `package.json` file in the `contribution.grammars` block.
```

> . Replace an information about the provided language in `src/plug-in_name.ts`. In that file should be an information about the location of LSP implementation and a command with arguments to run it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Replace the information about the provided language in the `src/plug-in_name.ts` file. This file contains information about the location of the Language Server Protocol (LSP) implementation and the command with arguments to run it.
```

. Build the plug-in by running `yarn` in the root of the project.

> . link:extending-che.html#adding-a-che-theia-plug-in-to-the-che-plug-in-registry_publishing-che-theia-plug-ins[Add the plug-in to the Che plug-in registry.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> [discrete]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> == Additional resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Additional resources
```

* link:https://github.com/eclipse/che-theia-samples/tree/master/samples/xml-language-server-plugin[Theia plug-in with XML Language Server]
* link:https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/[Language Server Protocol]
* link:https://code.visualstudio.com/api/language-extensions/overview[VS Code Language Extensions Documentation]

> * link:https://code.visualstudio.com/api/language-extensions/language-server-extension-guide[A simple Language Server for plain text files]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* link:https://code.visualstudio.com/api/language-extensions/language-server-extension-guide[A simple Language Server for plain text files]
* link:publishing-che-theia-plug-ins.html#adding-a-che-theia-plug-in-to-the-che-plug-in-registry_publishing-che-theia-plug-ins[Add the plug-in to the Che plug-in registry.]
```

[id="adding-support-for-a-new-language_{context}"]
= Adding support for a new language

> This section describes how to add support for a new language into Eclipse Che.

Reviewer 3: I would add a quick explanation of what adding language support consists of: it's a VS Code plugin that uses the languageserver-node library to hook into the VS Code API.

[discrete]
== Prerequisites

* Install the latest Che-Theia plug-in Yeoman generator by running:
+
----
$ npm install -g yo @theia/generator-plugin
----

[discrete]
== Procedure

. Generate a sample by running `yo @theia/plugin`. When prompted, confirm the choices for *Backend plug-in*, *Samples*, and then *Language sample*. This creates a project and a ready-to-use plug-in, which can be deployed.

> . Replace the download url of the implementation of language server protocol in `src/download-xml-ls.js` file. This file will be downloaded during the build process of the plug-in. If the name of `src/download-xml-ls.js` was changed, need to replace it in `package.json` in `scripts` block as well.

Reviewer 3: ...changed, you need to...

> . Replace the configuration of the language in `src/language-configuration.json` file, this file should contain configuration options for current language. If the name of `src/language-configuration.json` was changed, need to replace it in `package.json` in `contribution` block as well.

Reviewer 3: "changed, you need to replace it"

. Replace the configuration of the language in `src/xml.tmLanguage.json` file, this file describes syntax highlighting, determines the color and style of source code displayed in the editor. If the name of `src/xml.tmLanguage.json` was changed, need to replace it in `package.json` in `contribution.grammars` block as well.

. Replace an information about the provided language in `src/plug-in_name.ts`. In that file should be an information about the location of LSP implementation and a command with arguments to run it.

. Build the plug-in by running `yarn` in the root of the project.

> . Deploy the Che-Theia plug-in via the plug-in registry.

Reviewer 3: I would link to the section about "how to make a che 7 plugin out of a VS Code extension directly here. I didn't catch the connection to the link below, first

Author: Added a link to the documentation on how to add a plugin to plugin-registry as a last step

[discrete]
== Additional resources

* link:https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/[Language Server Protocol]
* link:https://code.visualstudio.com/api/language-extensions/overview[VS Code Language Extensions Documentation]
* link:https://code.visualstudio.com/api/language-extensions/language-server-extension-guide[A simple Language Server for plain text files]

> * link:adding-a-che-theia-plug-in-to-the-che-plug-in-registry.html[Adding a Che-Theia plug-in to the Che plug-in registry]

Reviewer 3: This points nowhere. What's the idea?

Reviewer: The correct link is `link:extending-che.html#adding-a-che-theia-plug-in-to-the-che-plug-in-registry_publishing-che-theia-plug-ins[Adding a Che-Theia plug-in to the Che plug-in registry]`

Author: Fixed, thanks @rkratky

Reviewer 3: @rkratky how can we verify the correctness of that kind of link?

Author: @tsmaeder I've checked it on next way:
1. Go to https://www.eclipse.org/che/docs/che-7/contributor-tasks.html
2. Replace `contributor-tasks.html` with `extending-che.html#adding-a-che-theia-plug-in-to-the-che-plug-in-registry_publishing-che-theia-plug-ins`

[id="adding-support-for-a-new-language_{context}"]
= Adding support for a new language

This section describes how to add support for a new language into Eclipse Che. 

> Che-Theia has an extension that uses the languageserver-node library to hook Che-Theia plug-in or VS Code extension which provides language support into the VS Code language API.

Reviewer 3: How about:
> While you can directly hook up a Theia plugin or VS Code extension to the plugin API, the usual way is to write a VS Code extension that uses the languageserver-node library to connect a language server to the VS Code extension API.

Author: updated

[discrete]
== Prerequisites

> * Install the latest Che-Theia plug-in Yeoman generator by running:

Reviewer 4: Should it also explain from where to start? Using with stack for example?

Reviewer 4: Maybe pointing to: https://github.com/eclipse/che-theia/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md

+
----
$ npm install -g yo @theia/generator-plugin
----

[discrete]
== Procedure

> . Generate a sample by running `yo @theia/plugin`. When prompted, confirm the choices for *Backend plug-in*, *Samples*, and then *Language sample*. This creates a project and a ready-to-use plug-in, which can be deployed.

Reviewer 4: Could this be pointing to a sample plugin for LS? I think that would help understand with some concrete examples.

Author: This generated sample already provides ready to use plug-in with XML Language Server
